[Music]
living together on this small precious
planet earth you must know that
freshwater is one of the most valuable
resources we have there are many
countries that have massive shortages of
drinking water and people have been in
constant search for new sources but
recently a solution just might have been
discovered and it lies deep under the
ocean reservoirs of freshwater under the
seabed were discovered back in the 1970s
scientists exploring the seafloor and
scanning what was under it accidentally
stumbled upon pockets that contain water
of reduced salinity it was not exactly
drinking quality but the level of salt
in it was at least half that of the sea
above the pockets at the time though the
researchers thought about this water is
no more than a curiosity they didn't
know the volume of these pockets or how
far they stretched but measurements
showed they were not very large which
settled the issue for more than 40 years
but interest in the subject flared anew
in 2015 when a group of scientists
headed by marine geologist Chloe Gupta
son decided to measure one of such
pockets off the coast of the US they
used electromagnetic waves to try and
find exactly how much fresh water might
be hiding beneath the ocean salt water
is a better conductor of electricity
than fresh water so the method should
have shown the difference in response
and what they found was simply
astounding it turned out that the pocket
which had been thought to be a rather
small and isolated thing stretched for
miles and miles under the ocean floor
and further down the east coast of the
US the scientists claim that the
freshwater reservoir is about 217 miles
in diameter spanning from Delaware in
the south to Massachusetts in the north
what's more dr. Gupta Sen also notes
that the results aren't comprehensive
the e/m measurements aren't precise and
they can't exactly show the depth of the
underground basin so here comes an even
Morris
feature the reservoir might be even
bigger and deeper than what the survey
showed but even now it's almost as large
as the biggest onshore freshwater bodies
some pocket huh but even this is not all
there is to the research dr. goof Susan
and her colleagues are pretty sure the
Atlantic Coast reservoir isn't the only
one in the world
others might and probably do exist in
different parts of the planet although
there still to be found you see hundreds
of thousands of years ago our planet was
covered in ice that period is known to
us as an ice age time passed and the
temperature rose to a level where I
started to melt when that happened fresh
water or its closest equivalent began
running all over the place
filling every crack and fissure it could
find oceans as we know them already
existed back then so much of that water
ran into them too but some of it was
trapped under the Earth's crust
certainly we've known about underground
water sources for a long time but this
discovery just might be a revolution in
more ways than one for the time being
there's no need to tap into those
undersea waters but if we're ever in
short supply of fresh water we now know
where to find it it might also bring a
much-needed relief to countries where
drinking water is the most precious
resource like many places in Africa or
the Middle East like I said before
scientists are hopeful that such
reservoirs as the one off the coast of
the u.s. can be found in other places
too and if one of them exists beneath
the coastal waters of Africa for example
it could be salvation for millions of
people but before we get our hopes too
high though let's not forget that this
underwater source is not entirely fresh
as we know it drinking quality means
that the level of salt or salinity is
one part per thousand measurements of
the underground whereas
however show that while closer to the
coast it's almost fresh about three
parts per thousand further down the
ocean floor it becomes more and more
sailing reaching 15 parts per thousand
it's still twice as low as the ocean
water though so it's surely worth
tapping into but if we can't drink it
how can we use it and should we well
don't forget we're living in the age of
technology and various scientific
discoveries science has already found a
way to deal with the problem of salinity
and water
there are desalination plants all over
the world that are already operating and
we actively use the results of their
work they make fresh water out of
seawater for now pushing salt out of it
and making it drinkable by far the
biggest of them is in Saudi Arabia
the country has precious little
freshwater but lots of natural resources
to power their plant so it produces
about 1/5 of all water in the world
the problem with desalination plants is
that they create lots of environmental
issues they require huge amounts of
energy which many of them take from
fossil fuels and as you know such fuel
is non-renewable and harmful for the
environment but that's not all
everything comes at a price and salt
from the seawater being disseminated
must go somewhere in fact out of every
million gallons of seawater only half
becomes fresh enough for humans to drink
the rest goes to waste
filled with so much salt that nothing
can live in it let alone ingest it all
this waste water is then dumped back
into the oceans slowly but steadily
increasing their salinity given that
there are over 20,000 desalination
plants in the world now you can imagine
what damage to the ocean ecosphere they
do ecological surveys show that
desalination of seawater
may have already caused extinction of
some underwater flora and fauna and
there's more to come if we're not
careful with what we do and there's also
the issue of greenhouse gases the plants
emit
dr. Michael Kapowski of the wheeler
water Institute at the University of
California Berkeley says that our
actions can create a kind of vicious
circle if we continue using desalination
plants as they are today
they'll create more greenhouse effect
warming our planet and as it warms we'll
need more freshwater and thus more
seawater desalinated sea that's why it's
so important that we found a source of
freshwater underground in fact its value
cannot be overestimated if we have huge
untapped reservoirs of almost drinkable
water we don't really need a process on
which sea water
what's more right now many countries
including the US depend on other
underground water reservoirs such as the
Great ogala aquifer that nourishes eight
states of america i bet you can picture
what the finding of a new body of water
similar in size means for the country
and finally there's one more thing to
say about this newfound fresh water
source like i said earlier it appeared
because of the melting of ice after the
ice age ended but recent research
suggests that these undersea waters are
also fed by land sources rivers streams
and rainfall what it means is that the
reservoir has been steadily growing
since the ice age and continues to do so
even now as you're watching this video
for humankind such a discovery means a
lot of things and perhaps the best of
them is a whole new hope for survival I
already mentioned that desalination
requires a lot of energy and makes tons
of waste and it's only natural that it
costs a lot too the undersea freshwater
also has to be desalinated but the cost
of it would be much lower it would
produce a lot less salty wastewater and
require a great deal less energy I don't
think I need to say that it would be a
huge relief for our planet
as for the groundwater in the shallow
areas under the seabed it's pretty much
fresh as it is it only becomes saline
and undrinkable when it goes farther
into the sea
so if we ever extract water from the
areas close to the coast it won't
require any desalination at all
translating that we have a huge vessel
of drinking water right beneath our feet
well if we go wet them on the beach that
is in the meantime though it's worth
mentioning that the Atlantic reservoir
doesn't need to be pumped for water the
east coast of the US has plenty of fresh
water as is but research continues and
scientists are positive they'll find
other reservoirs like this one
Australian researchers for example have
already expressed hope that there's
another pocket of water somewhere around
their continent - it would greatly help
the country that mostly consists of arid
deserts so what do you think is it worth
starting to tap the newfound water
source right now or hold onto it for an
unrated a let me know down in the
comments hey if you learned something
new today then give this video a like
and share it with a friend
but don't go imbibing h2o just yet we
have over two thousand cool videos for
you to check out just click on this left
or right video and enjoy stay on the
bright side of life
[Music]
you